Key Rotation Documentation (#2765)
wso2/docs-is: en/docs/administer/blue-green-data-encryption-keyrotation.md

# Blue-Green Data Encryption Key Rotation

> This section contains the complete process you need to follow in order to perform symmetric data encryption key rotation on a WSO2 Identity Sever(5.11.0 and above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section contains the complete process you need to follow in order to perform symmetric data encryption key rotation in WSO2 Identity Sever(WSO2 IS version 5.11.0 and above).
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Why should you rotate encryption keys?

!!! note
    Originator Usage Period(OUP) is the time period during which encryption is applied to data.

*   A cryptoperiod is the time span during which a specific key is authorized for use. [NIST SP 800-57](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-57pt1r5.pdf) recommends different cryptoperiods for different encryption key types.
    *   Symmetric Data Encryption Keys
        *   OUP recommended for large volumes of data is about a day or a week
        *   OUP recommended for smaller volumes of data is about 2 years
    *   Symmetric Key, Wrapping Keys
        *   OUP recommended for a key that wraps a large number of keys is about a day or a week
        *   OUP recommended for key that wraps smaller number of keys is upto 2 years
*   Security compliance requirements
*   Security breach requirements

!!! note

>     The above mentioned cryptoperiods can vary based on other factors like the sensitivity of data and the amount of data we have etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The above mentioned cryptoperiods can vary based on other factors like the sensitivity of data and the amount of data we have.
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Background

WSO2 Identity Server has the following key usages for signing/encrypting data and each of these types will have different key rotation requirements.

1.  TLS Connection
2.  Signing and encryption of data (JWT assertions, payloads) shared with external parties (SP, IdP)
3.  Encryption of sensitive runtime level configuration secrets/user data persisted in datastores and userstores
4.  Encryption of sensitive deployment level configuration data in configuration files

> From WSO2 IS 5.11.0 onwards, symmetric encryption mechanism is used to encrypt internal sensitive runtime data above. The DEK used to encrypt these data is configured in the `deployment.toml` file and it is protected by a KEK. The secure vault is utilized as of now to protect this DEK. Here, only the rotation of the Data Encryption Key configured in the `deployment.toml` file is considered. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From WSO2 IS 5.11.0 onwards, symmetric encryption is used to encrypt the internal sensitive runtime data above. The DEK used to encrypt these data is configured in the `deployment.toml` file and it is protected by a KEK. The secure vault is utilized as of now to protect this DEK. Here, only the rotation of the Data Encryption Key configured in the `deployment.toml` file is considered. 
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## DEK rotation frequency

> In the case of a security compliance requirement we can see that symmetric DEK rotation can be done in 2 years or less based on the volume of data we have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of a security compliance requirement, we can see that symmetric DEK rotation can be done in 2 years or less based on the volume of data present.
```

    | REG_PROPERTY                             | Keystore passwords, Keystore privatekeyPass and Entitlement subscriberPasswords | 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Configuration files that support re-encryption

At the moment, the configuration files given below are supported for re-encryption.

!!! info "Configuration files that support re-encryption"
    
    | **Configuration file**            | **Path**                                                          | **Property** |
    |-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------|
    | Event publishers                  | `/repository/deployment/server/eventpublishers` files             | Password     | 
    | Super tenant secondary userstores | `/repository/deployment/server/userstores/<userstore>` files      | Password     | 
    | Tenant secondary userstores       | `/repository/tenants/<tenant_id>/userstores/<userstore>` files    | Password     |      

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Tables that support syncing

> At the moment, the tables given below can be synced synced during key rotation from the old setup to the new setup. Any other data will not be persisted in the new setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, the tables given below can be synced during key rotation from the old setup to the new setup. Any other data will not be persisted in the new setup.
```

    | IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN_SCOPE | OAuth 2.0 scopes                                        | If the IDN_OAUTH2_ACCESS_TOKEN is synced, this table also needs to be synced                                                                                            |
    | IDN_OAUTH2_AUTHORIZATION_CODE | OAuth 2.0 authorization codes                           | Need to sync if the authorization codes created during the key rotation period need to be valid after key rotation |

!!! note
    In this section, `<OLD_IS_HOME>` is the directory where the current Identity Server resides, and `<NEW_IS_HOME>` is the directory where the copy of the current Identity Server resides. `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>` refers to the location [here](https://github.com/wso2/identity-tools/components/org.wso2.carbon.identity.keyrotation) and the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` refers to the location of the external tool.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How To Create The Key Rotation Tool

1.  Clone the repository, [identity-tools](https://github.com/wso2/identity-tools).

2.  Build it using maven by running the command `mvn clean install`.

> 3.  Go to the `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/target` folder and copy the `keyrotation-tool-<version>-SNAPSHOT.jar` jar file and the `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/target/lib` folder to `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location. Get the `properties.yaml` file, `keyrotation.sh` file and the `triggers` folder from `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/src/main/resources` and copy to the same `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  Go to the `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/target` folder and copy the `keyrotation-tool-<version>-SNAPSHOT.jar` file and the `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/target/lib` folder to `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>`. Get the `properties.yaml` file, `keyrotation.sh` file, and the `triggers` folder from `<KEY_ROTATION_REPO>/src/main/resources` and copy them to the same `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location.
```

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Performing blue-green key rotation

1.  Block all privileged user flows and allow only end user flows.

    !!! note

>         For the privileged user flows, block all admin services from the load balancer and the management console as well. For end user flows the above [tables](../../administer/blue-green-data-encryption-keyrotation/#tables-that-support-syncing) will be synced to the `<NEW_IS_HOME>`, so only these end user data flows should be allowed to generate in the `<OLD_IS_HOME>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        For the privileged user flows, block all admin services from the load balancer and the management console as well. For end user flows, the above [tables](../../administer/blue-green-data-encryption-keyrotation/#tables-that-support-syncing) will be synced to the `<NEW_IS_HOME>`, so only these end user data flows should be allowed to generate in `<OLD_IS_HOME>`.
```

2.  Execute the `old<identity-db-type>.sql` script in the `<OLD_IS_HOME>` identity database to create temp tables and triggers.

    !!! note
        The triggers can be found inside the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>/triggers` folder.

3.  Create a copy of the `<OLD_IS_HOME>`(This copied directory will be refered to as the `NEW_IS_HOME`) and dump `<OLD_IS_HOME>` identity and registry databases and create the new databases.

4.  Drop the temp tables and triggers in the `<NEW_IS_HOME>` identity database using the `new<identity-db-type>.sql` script.

    !!! note
        The triggers can be found inside the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>/triggers` folder.

> 5.  Open the properties.yaml file inside `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location and edit the configurations accordingly.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5.  Open the `properties.yaml` file in `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` and edit the configurations accordingly.   
```

    *   oldSecretKey - The symmetric encryption key used in the `<OLD_IS_HOME>`
    !!! note

>         If the key is encrypted using cipher tool decrypt it back as shown [here](https://shagihan.medium.com/decrypt-encrypted-text-with-the-wso2-cipher-tool-15b67624620a).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        If the key is encrypted using cipher tool, decrypt it back as shown [here](https://shagihan.medium.com/decrypt-encrypted-text-with-the-wso2-cipher-tool-15b67624620a).
```

        newRegUsername: root
        newRegPassword: cm9vdA==
        enableDBMigrator: true
        enableConfigMigrator: true
        enableSyncMigrator: true
        chunkSize: 2
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for H2 DB type URL"
            
        ```
        jdbc:h2:~/Desktop/IS/copy/wso2is-5.11.0-beta5-SNAPSHOT/repository/database/WSO2IDENTITY_DB
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for MySQL DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/idndb?useSSL=false
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for DB2 DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:db2://localhost:50000/idndb
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for PostgreSQL DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:postgresql://localhost:5432/idndb
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for MSSQL DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:sqlserver://localhost:1433;databaseName=idndb
        ```
    ??? tip "Sample configuration written for Oracle DB type URL"
        
        ```
        jdbc:oracle:thin:@localhost:1521/ORCLCDB.LOCALDOMAIN
        ```

> 6.  Run the tool using `./keyrotation.sh keyrotation-tool-<version>-SNAPSHOT.jar` command from the `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>` location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6.  Run the tool using the `./keyrotation.sh keyrotation-tool-<version>-SNAPSHOT.jar` command from `<KEY_ROTATION_TOOL>`.
```

7.  Edit the `<NEW_IS_HOME>` `deployment.toml` file having the new configured databases and the new key. 

> 8.  Start `<NEW_IS_HOME>` once existing DB and config file data re-encryption is done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8.  Start `<NEW_IS_HOME>` once the re-encryption for the existing DB and config file is done.
```
